you might be wondering how did the
ancient Stoics view lust and love were
they hopeless romantics or rather cold
and distant were they pleasure seekers
enjoying polyamory or did they value the
duties of marriage in this video I will
explore lust love and stoicism first of
all thank you McLeod for his support on
patreon very much appreciated and it
helps me to continue creating these
videos so there's a big difference
between love and lust although in
today's day and age we often mix them up
we could say that unconditional love is
the purest form there is and something
that's completely in our control stoic
philosopher Epictetus described the
things inner control as by nature free
unrestrained and unhindered that's why
we can give this type of love away
freely and don't need anything in return
so the quality of it doesn't depend on
what outside forces are up to lust on
the other hand is a desire for something
that is not in our control when we are
lustful we crave for the body of another
human being and when this body for some
reason isn't available we suffer
Epictetus describe the things not in our
control as weak slavish restrained and
belonging to others living in a Western
culture
I see great emphasis put on romantic
love the romantic love ideal has become
such an important pursuit that we have
elevated it to an ultimate concern more
often than not in secular countries
romantic love rises above any form of
religion and spirituality some people
live for romance making is mesmerizing
experience the focus of their lives
unfortunately there's a problem with
this pursuit when two people fall in
love they reside in a period of
infatuation called the honeymoon phase
whether or not nature meant is to be
simply an incentive to procreate the
honeymoon phase doesn't last
after the intense euphoria decreases
it's not unlikely that people feel
cheated without a rose-colored glasses
they see a human being with probably the
many flaws that they initially
overlooked as a result many people
rather seek for another romantic hai and
abandon those that aren't doing it for
them anymore such a love is self-serving
rather than serving others in many ways
romantic love is built on clinging and
aversion we cling to someone immensely
and are averse to the idea that we get
separated from this person he who fails
to obtain the object of his desire is
disappointed and he will incur the
object of his aversion wretched said
Epictetus the experience of being
wretched is very commonly seen in
individuals that are in a romantic love
affair in the form of jealousy jealousy
between lovers can be quite destructive
it's an emotion based on the fear that
our lover will leave us for someone else
this often results in possessiveness the
need to control the movement of another
human being to assure ourselves that
they won't do things we don't like which
is just another form of clinging such
relationships don't seem very virtuous
nor do they lead to inner peace still as
opposed to what some might think the
Stoics did not disapprove of
relationships yet they did not recommend
clinging or the indulgence in lust
Seneca for example Saudi indulgence in
lust as worst of the sins and a quote
among the worst cases I count also those
who give their time to nothing but drink
and lust for these are the most shameful
preoccupations of all and quote Seneca
stated that those who are abandoned to
the belly and lust bear the stain of
dishonor and thought that people who are
quickly angered greedy and violent at
least sin in a more quote/unquote manly
fashion this doesn't mean that we
shouldn't experience lust at all the joy
of intercourse can be seen as a
preferred indifferent which is a
subordinate to the stoic virtue called
moderation as opposed to lustful
indulgence Seneca respected
love and meaningful relationships with
our people in fact they concerned him a
great deal he valued marriage and the
duties involved and expressed his
dislike towards divorce and adultery
such a stance is congruent with stoic
ethics that point to living a virtuous
life above everything else stoic
philosopher sonja's Rufus also valued
marriage a lot and saw mutual care as
the cornerstone for a successful Union I
quote in marriage there must be complete
companionship and concern for each other
on the part of both husband and wife in
health and in sickness and at all times
because they entered upon the marriage
for this reason as well as to produce
offspring and quote Missoni is also
observed that when in a marriage people
only look at their own interests and
neglect their partners it is doomed to
fail we can see this happening in some
affectional as marriages in which people
share a roof together while perpetually
seeking pleasure outside the house
Missoni is called as an existence worse
than loneliness even though the Stoics
considered love to be important they
also recommend is not to cling to the
things we love at the end of the day a
spouse a friend a child or a pet is not
in our control and we can lose them in a
heartbeat Epictetus put it this way and
a quote never say of anything I have
lost it but I have returned it it's your
child dad it is returned it's your wife
dad she is returned and quote this
attitude might come in handy for people
that worry about their partner's
cheating in the future if that happens
remember that this isn't a loss it's
just a return to keep things simple I
would say that the core of stoic love is
the facilitation of a virtue a union
between two people like marriage can be
seen as a potential vessel for good like
caring for each other and raising
children this idea echoes through
religions like Christianity and Islam in
which marriage is also seen as the
correct way for two people to practice
love as well as lost
although the stokes are not cold and
distant towards human affection they
value virtue the most intimate
relationships and virtue do not have to
contradict each other even lust can be
part of a virtuous life as long as it
isn't overdone but hey let's face it
aren't there higher things to pursue and
some fun between the sheets please let
me know in the comment section thank you
for watching
[Music]